So, I want to talk about sovereign engineering, I hope that from this transcript
or from just this audio file I will be able to distill the essence of sovereign
engineering. So, my hope is that I will be able to produce a concept document or
kind of how it works or why it works kind of document. I will probably have to
properly sit down and write it myself, write a blog post or something or write a
section of the homepage but it always helps to go out for a walk and think about
it and talk about it even if it is only by yourself. So, have a dialogue with
yourself, have a dialogue with the thoughts and so that is what I am trying to
do right now and coincidentally that is also part of the philosophy of the
sovereign engineering program. But let's talk about the name first, so where
does the name come from sovereign engineering? It obviously has engineering in
the name, so it is about bringing engineers together and trying to figure out
how to build certain things, how to actually engineer a future that is worth
having, how to engineer parts of the new internet that we want to build and
internet worth having and the sovereign part comes from the book, the sovereign
individual. So, the idea is that in the name alone, there is already the name
alone, the name of the program alone should give you an idea of what it is. We
are not looking at technology as like a completely non-political thing in some
sense, so the technology we are interested in has a certain ideology and a
certain ethos built in. And the ethos is beautifully described in the book, the
sovereign individual. And the ethos might be best summarized of the morals and
the ethos that is embodied in Bitcoin. The way I mean this is that Bitcoin puts
the individual in the center and it is built in this peculiar way to maximize
individual freedom and maximize individual agency. You are not beholden to a
trusted third party, for example. You can verify how the technology works and
what is happening in the system from top to bottom at any point in time, the
system even self-verifies itself and so on. So, any technology that puts the
individual in the center that gives users agency that focuses on providing
individual certain freedoms that we all know and love from meat space, from
freedoms that are embodied in the US Constitution, for example, like freedom of
speech, freedom of assembly, freedom of movement, all those kind of things,
that's what we are interested in at sovereign engineering, that's what the
program is focused on. Unfortunately, the internet evolved in a way so that
these freedoms are not a given online, like in cyberspace, we actually don't
have these freedoms that I just listed. Everyone knows this kind of that we are
bound to those big internet platforms and you actually don't have freedom of
speech, like you can say the wrong thing and you'll be just kicked out, you'll
be the platform that the moments notice, you can even associate with the wrong
people, like liking the wrong tweet or whatever or liking the wrong video will
get you into trouble, all those kind of things. So, you also don't have freedom
of assembly because some people are not allowed to be on those platforms and you
definitely don't have freedom of movement, so you cannot take your data and go
somewhere else in a meaningful way, so you don't have any way to exit the system
really, the exit costs are incredibly high. And so, we are interested in kind of
a new way of doing things where these freedoms that I listed are just a given,
where freedom of speech is a given, where no one can censor you just by the way
that the system works. Noster is a great example, for example, Bitcoin is also a
great example, so because you can run, compile and run everything yourself,
there is no way for anyone to meaningfully censor you, because there is
anonymity and pseudonymity built in, there is not even a way to identify you in
a meaningful way so that censorship could apply. And so, that's what we think is
very, very interesting and very powerful and very much needed in the times we
are living in and I think it will be even more important going forward, so the
longer time goes on, the more unstable the legacy web gets and the more
unstable, well, multiple legacy systems. I think many people agree that we are
headed into a time of instability, multiple legacy systems are collapsing or on
the brink of collapse, and so I'm convinced that having resilient systems,
having systems that guarantee freedom of speech, having systems that do not
allow for unilateral censorship, those kind of things, having resilient
decentralized systems is going to be essential, and Bitcoin is such a system,
Noster is such a system, those are the two kind of things that we mostly focus
on. And the question that we always ask in the sovereign engineering cohorts is
kind of, what does it mean to build something in the spirit of Bitcoin? So,
again, certain design decisions were made that align to the kind of moral, that
align with the moral framework that I just mentioned, that align the design
decisions have to align with the values that the system wants to represent, and
we try to come up with new systems or complementary systems that embody the same
values. So, Blossom would be one example of that, and there's many others, so
yeah, that's what it is about. So, let's move on from the name sovereign
engineering to how it works. It is a very peculiar program, it's kind of novel,
it's not something that has existed before, at least that I'm aware of, and when
we started it, we tried to describe it as something like a bootcamp, or
something that might be a little bit similar to a hackathon, but also not. So,
the way we try to describe it is just like there's conferences and
unconferences, this might be described as an unhackathon. And the reason why we
try to describe it as that is because we knew from the beginning that there will
be no sleeping on the floor, there will be no three days of hardcore hacking,
and in the end you'll be judged and there will be a winner and so on, like none
of that. The approach that we are taking for sovereign engineering is quite
simple. We want to bring the best and brightest minds in the sovereign
technology space together for a prolonged period of time, and we want to build
an environment that fosters high bandwidth communication and collaboration and
ideation. So, the main point of the whole program is to come up with new ideas,
and in the best case, immediately implement the ideas and see if they work. So,
everything is structured around that principle. We want to come up with new
ideas, and we want to immediately try it out, and show it to the group, and show
it to the world, and see if the idea strikes a chord, if the idea works, and
then iterate from there. And so, the whole program has a very peculiar, weakly
structure. Every week is structured the same, and so we meet on Monday, Monday
mornings are our orientation mornings, we discuss what we want to do this week,
what kind of the theme is, what we want to focus on. Tuesday talks, so on
Tuesday everyone has the opportunity to give a talk, to talk about something
that they find interesting or meaningful for the group, and the idea of the
Tuesday talks is to have a discussion, to present something to the group, to
speak about high level concepts, or talk about something ideas and other things
that might be interesting for the group in that context. Wednesday, we have
Wednesday workshops. So, workshops are very different from talks, in a sense
that it's an actual hands-on session. So, someone will teach you something that
you don't know how to do yet, it might be setting up a certain system, or it
might be assembling a certain type of hardware that you're unfamiliar with, or
doing something that you don't know how to do it yet, and someone who knows how
to do it will show you. So, it's not a presentation, it's not a talk, it's
actually a hands-on workshop. On Thursday, we don't have any agenda, so Thursday
is kind of an off day, you can spend it as you wish. There is no set program for
Thursday, so people will either, you know, explore beautiful Madera, or work on
some other project that they have, or try to implement one of the ideas that
came up during the week. And Friday, Friday is the most important day, Friday is
demo day. So, every Friday, around lunchtime, around early afternoon, we get
together, and we have a highly structured demo day, in the sense that there are
certain rules that you must not break. This is very, very important. Everyone
has to demo something, and the demo has to be something that you yourself
actually built. It doesn't matter if it breaks, it doesn't matter if you think
the idea is stupid, it doesn't matter if it's like half done. You have to get in
front of the group, and present what you worked on, present the actual thing
that you built. Not a presentation, no slides, it actually has to compile and
run, and something has to happen. It doesn't matter if it's like a CLI tool, it
doesn't matter if it has a GUI or not, or what have you, you have to show off
something that you actually built yourself. In the age of vibe coding, that's
very, very easy. You should be able to implement the idea that you had in less
than half a day. Some of the things you can even one shot, and it should take
you less than like 10, 20 minutes to try something out and show it off. We're
not after quality, in that sense, for demo day, we're after novelty. We want to
come up with new ideas, new ways of doing things, new ways to structure a
system, new ways to solve a problem that wasn't solved or was only partly solved
before. That's kind of the weekly structure, so that's kind of the how it works,
part of sovereign engineering, and on the weekends we'll do group activities.
Oh, I forgot. I forgot that on Friday, after the demo day, that's also
important. After the demo day, we'll have a barbecue, everyone kind of stays
together, comes together, family and friends, welcome, and we will discuss kind
of what was shown off, what ideas were good, what ideas were bad. I want to
mention again on Friday for the demo days, the time boxing is super, super
important. We usually do a six minute demo, two minute discussion, no
exceptions. There's like someone will be there with a timer, and depending on
the number of participants, we usually have 21 participants. We have to time box
this aggressively, otherwise every Friday will go on until after midnight.
That's what we painfully learned in the first cohort, and this is a rule that
you must not break. It's going to be a very short demo, very short discussion,
and then it's on to the next one, and we will have coffee breaks and things in
between, but with 25 people, something like that, it always takes a while, and
it's very exhausting and draining to go through so many new things at once. To
be respectful to absolutely everyone, we have to time box it very, very
aggressively. Yeah, back to the weekends and to the group activities, so the
whole idea of the program was to go and walk together, just like the Greeks did
in the good old days. Lots of people that I admire and respect, and that I would
consider wise, and slash or very, very smart, they would tell you that the
greatest ideas are kind of arrived at when you go on a walk. It's like I
mentioned, it's in August enough, he basically coined the phrase, the Latin
phrase that I don't have top of mind, but Solvitor Ambulando or something like
that. By walking, it shall be solved, and he's not the only one who figured that
out, there's many, many people that, you know, like Nietzsche famously said,
that you should never trust a thought that you had indoors, like you should be
out walking in the woods, just like I am now. And I know that this really works
because I went on many walks with many people before we decided to start the
Sovereign Engineering program, and I saw this working firsthand many, many
times, and I was like, okay, let's replicate that in like an engineering
context. And so one of the core pillars of Sovereign Engineering is the walking
and the talking. Again, the whole program revolves around ideation and
experimentation. So how do you come up with new ideas? You bring very bright
people together, and you create an environment where free flowing conversations
can happen. And so that's what we are trying to do. And in my experience, one of
the best ways to facilitate this is to go on easy, long-ish walks, like longer
than 90 minutes. 90 minutes is kind of the sweet spot in terms of having a long
conversation. So two, three hours walking with some breaks and, you know, like a
meal after that, that's usually where, you know, like very conductive to just
high bandwidth conversation and to having a free flow of conversations. I can't
emphasize enough how important the walking part is. Sovereign Engineering
without going on walks is not Sovereign Engineering. It's an absolutely crucial
part of the whole program. So the whole group has to go on walks. I would say
the walks are mandatory. You know, if someone breaks a foot and so on, like
Celevy, they won't be able to participate. But it is a core pillar of the whole
program. And the way the walks are structured is also very, very important. So
it must not be hard walks. It must not be super, super steep. You need to be
able to talk. You need to be able to talk while you're walking. Not all
engineers are super, super fit. So it has to be mostly flat. It has to be an
easy path where you don't trip over yourself all the time, where you have to
like highly concentrate to watch where you're stepping and so on. That's super
important. It has to be something that anyone can do. And where you just go on a
walk and you just talk. The other important part is the path has to be wide
enough so that people can walk next to each other. It must not be single line
walks. Unfortunately, in Madera, there's many kind of live others that are
awesome to walk, but they're all single line. That's not very good because you
want to have the group mixed up and you want to have a natural formation of
small groups to talk to each other. And if someone takes a break because they
need to have a sip of water, they will automatically fall back to the next group
and they will talk to new people. That's also why regular dinners and stuff like
that don't work. They're absolutely dog shit to have free flowing conversations
because you sit on one long table, so you have at most three conversational
partners. The guy sitting left to the left to you, the guy sitting to the right
of you, and the guy sitting in front of you. That's at most. And so walks
absolutely fix that. If you go on walks and you pick the walks carefully,
basically everyone will talk to everyone. The other important part about the
walks is you need to have guides, one guide in front and one in the back that
keeps the group together. People's walking speeds differ drastically. And so the
guides have to keep the group together. And the guide in front has to take care
that the group doesn't kind of fall apart just for walking speed reasons and has
to stop the group and gather everyone together. Like what a break, whatever, or
for like let's look at the view, those kind of things. And then everyone is
grouped up again, and then we can go again. And that will automatically
reshuffle the conversations that reshuffle the conversational partners and all
those kind of things. That's super, super important. I can't emphasize that
enough how important that is. The whole ideation, the whole conversation part of
that depends on the walks and that people know what they are doing in terms of
shepherding the walks, guiding the walks, all those kind of things. It's super
important, super important. If you don't do that, the same thing will always
happen. The people that like each other and the people that already know each
other will stay in small groups and you will not have a bigger group formation,
you will not have like cross pollination of ideas. It will compartmentalize in
like smaller groups. If you don't go on walks, if you don't do activities, if
you don't do those kind of things, if you don't kind of build an environment
where it naturally mixes, where things naturally mix together. That's crucial
for cross pollination of ideas to happen and for conversations that otherwise
wouldn't have happened to happen. Anyway, as you can tell by the tone of my
voice, I really, really care about the walks and about doing this correctly and
doing this right. Alright, what else? Let me think. So we discussed the name,
why it is called sovereign engineering. We discussed the weekly structure and
how it works, kind of, and we discussed walking and talking part. So what I
showed off and what is kind of the core of the concept is this weekly loop
because every week has the same structure. This loop is the core of sovereign
engineering and the loop is kind of walk, show, build. And the walking part we
already discussed. So the walking includes the talking. So it's like walk and
talk so that you can come up with new ideas. The show part is the Friday, the
Monday part. I mean, you can also show, of course, what you've got cooking and
so on during the week, but you show like to select people and so on to discuss
it during the week. But Friday, the most crucial day of every week of sovereign
engineering is where you actually show what you've built to the group. And then
it will be judged. It will be discussed. There will be follow-up questions.
People will tell you whether they think it's a good idea or whether they think
it's a stupid idea. That is important because otherwise you will be stuck
building in the wrong direction for months and years and so on. So that was
actually kind of the main motivation to start sovereign engineering was because
we've been in this space so long we saw over and over and over again how people
managed to confuse themselves and just build in the wrong direction for years
for months and years. And that's just such a waste of great engineering
potential. And so you need other people to figure out whether an idea is stupid
or not. You yourself cannot figure it out. You need to tap into the distributed
cognition of the group to figure out whether something actually has a chance of
working or not. On your own, you're lost. That's just a fact of psychology
basically. And so I've been influenced in the last couple of years by John
Verveki who talks about distributed cognition a lot. And he's a very smart and I
would also say very wise person. And he is adamant about the fact that all the
hard problems, the ill-defined problems of the world, you cannot solve on your
own as a lone wolf. You have to tap into distributed cognition. You have to tap
into the logos. That's why we go on the walks and have to do the talking and so
on and so forth. Because you will never know where the conversation leads you.
And if you have a good conversation, the conversation itself will bring up new
points and will kind of a great conversation takes on the life of its own. And
you have no idea where it goes. And your conversational partner also has no idea
where it goes. And that's why we also want to have a close group kind of trust
building environment because you can only do that if there is no kind of
ulterior motive or hidden agenda in your conversational partner. We only want to
have people, that's our engineering, that actually want to build cool shit and
that care about the things that we care about. And then together we want to
figure out how can we best, you know, build that, how can we best, you know,
vibe it into existence, if you will. Anyway, I got sidetracked from the loop. So
we have walk, show, build. And the building part is kind of, if you know what
you're building, if you exactly know beforehand how it should work, the building
part isn't even the hardest part, especially when it comes to trying out an idea
and prototyping it. So we encourage people to build on their own time. We
actually do have a co-working space where people can work together and so on and
so forth. But in terms of building, you will have people around that you can ask
for advice that you can, you know, like go to if you're stuck when it comes to,
I don't know, implementing a certain e-cash primitive for what have you. If
you're stuck somewhere, you will have people that can help you. But the idea of
sovereign engineering is not to focus on the building itself, like we, we will
not teach you how to code. We will not teach you how to build the perfect
whatever wallet or how to build the perfect master client or anything like that,
not at all, quite the opposite. The idea of sovereign engineering is to do
massive exploration and massive ideation. So just come up with as many ideas as
we can and try them out immediately, even if it's built imperfectly, even if
it's built in not the best, not most high performing way. It's more about the
ideas and the concepts than the implementation itself. And we will not help you
with the implementation, basically, like here on your own, we assume that you
know how to code. We assume that you know what Bitcoin is and how it works and
why it is important. We assume that you know what lighting is and how it works.
And we assume that you know what master is and how it works and why it is
important. That's kind of the base assumption of people that come here, you
shouldn't like come in completely blind, completely without any prior knowledge.
And other than that, we don't have any requirements really. The main requirement
is that you need to be able to come to Madera for six weeks. So you have to be
able to afford that, you have to be able to have time for that. If you have
family or pets or whatever, it doesn't matter too much. We had many participants
that joined with their family, the joined, you know, that brought their dog or
what have you. And we are more than happy to help with logistics. We are more
than happy to give advice in terms of how to best do this and get this done.
Yeah, but other than that, you just need to be eager to build. And if all of
that sounds attractive to you, then you are the right person. And you should
send in an application and you should apply. And we're going to look through it
and then we'll start the process of enrolling you and we will walk you. And if
we think that you're a good fit, then we will welcome you to the next cohort. So
maybe as kind of the final, some final thoughts in some sense. Why are we doing
it and why is it working? I think Southern Engineering was a great success until
now. Lots of awesome projects came out of it. Half of the things that are kind
of staples now in the world of Noster came out of one of the cohorts. I
mentioned Blossom already. There's also ZapStore. There's also NGIT. There's so
many. There's too many to list. I will not list them here right now because it's
going to break the transcript anyway because the transcript will not be able to
make sense of all the words I just said. Inside is another one that's great.
There's many great things that came out of it. I'm always blanking on the full
list because there's just too many. There's like 20, 30, 40 awesome projects
that came out of it. And so why is it working? Well, I think it is working
because we put a lot of thought into what we want to have happen. So what we
want to have happen is the magic that everyone knows that if people that have
been working on the same thing for a long time but never really met come
together and are allowed to speak for the first time. So that usually happens in
and around conferences, mostly around conferences in bars and on planes and so
on. And the main idea was like let's just have this magic happen longer. And
let's like fuck the conference. Skip the conference. We don't need the
conference. Let's just all come together and basically brainstorm and discuss
ideas and try things out. Yeah, in a nice environment. Oh, yeah, that's another
thing that we should talk about the the Madera part. So the home base of
sovereign engineering is the island of Madera. It's a beautiful island in the
Atlantic. It has very temperate climate. The living costs are relatively low. It
has great food. It's a beautiful place. It's like 21 degrees centigrade all year
round. The sun is basically always shining. Yeah, you're you're a little dot in
the middle of the Atlantic. So the water is beautiful. You can go swimming all
year round. There's many activities you can do. There's lots of hiking you can
do. There's some great hikes. It has like relatively high mountains for such a
small island. You have like just the geology is mind blowing. The views are mind
blowing. You have all these micro climates that make the island really
interesting. You have you know like subtropical rainforests and you have you
know like all kinds of different aspects to the island that are just wonderful.
And it should go without saying but I should probably make it like very very
explicit. Sovereign engineering is an in person thing. So you have to be in
person otherwise it would never work. High bandwidth communication, trust
building and ideation. If you want to have it on steroids it only works in
person. It only works in person. And so we have to bring everyone together in
the same place. And because Pablo and myself when we came up with the idea
basically and Martin and Andre as well. We were all living in Madera. We were
all moving to Madera at the time except for Andre who was already there. He's
like born and raised in Madera. We landed on Madera as the place obviously. And
because it's beautiful and because it has an international airport it's
relatively easy to get there. It is relatively cheap to be there. It is the
perfect environment to do sovereign engineering because you can also walk all
year round like it doesn't snow or anything like that. There is never like a day
you know like worst case you walk in light rain basically. It's just a beautiful
place and yeah so sovereign engineering is happening in Madera in person. I
didn't know about the place before I moved there but now in the Bitcoin world at
least I think it's quite well known because it is a Bitcoin hub of sorts. You
can live fully on a Bitcoin standard in Madera. And that's also what makes it
very very exciting. That's one aspect that I also should really highlight that
you can actually alpha test the future you're building in Madera. We had
participants build e-cash wallets from scratch and the next day go to a coffee
shop or something and buy coffee with it. And they blew their own minds while
doing it because the stuff you just built allowed you to you know like purchase
real world goods and that's just unless you live there and you do it every day
it's just a magical feeling. If you do it every day it kind of becomes
normalized but it's still awesome that you know like you can go to like almost
any coffee place, almost any restaurant on the island, many other places that
just accept Bitcoin outright and yeah there's true merchant adoption in Madera.
It's 150 plus merchants or something like that you can look it up on BTC map.
And it's just glorious to be able to you know spend sets and kind of you know
you fool around the nuster you get saps you get whatever and you know you buy a
coffee or a shirt or whatever the next day with the sets that you get saps. And
yeah that's another aspect of sort of engineering that I think is really
beautiful and really worth pointing out and I think it's also why people keep
coming back. So yeah I'm kind of at the end of it kind of getting dizzy from
talking and walking in the sun so much. But I hope that was useful maybe the
transcript will spit something out this useful maybe with the help of an LLM or
whatever. We can generate something that we can put somewhere that explains
things a bit more I'm also tempted to just put this MP3 file somewhere. I think
I'll keep it at that.

Okay, one more thing that I forgot to mention. So regarding the name I mentioned
that sovereign engineering comes from the sovereign individual and, well, we
want to bring together engineers, we want to bring together people that know how
to code and how to engineer systems and so on. But in terms of the vibe and the
spirit and the kind of imagery that we use, our logo is a ship and so a lot of
the metaphors that we use and a lot of the quotes and sayings that we have are
kind of, they have the theme of the sea and the wide and open sea, the wild and
open sea. And we talk about Commander Shackleton from time to time who managed
to go through hell and come back alive with the crew of the endurance. And we
also have the quote that basically says if you want to build a ship, don't divvy
up tasks and assemble the man to complete those tasks and so on, you have to
make them yearn for the wild and open sea or something like that. I'm probably
misremembering the quote, but you get the idea. And so the reason why we picked
this kind of theme and our logo is a ship is not only because there's an awesome
pirate ship in Madera to ship that actually discovered Madera that we charter
from time to time, but it's also because the metaphor is very apt that Bitcoin
and Nasr in particular, in general the cryptographic identity space and the kind
of having proper working cash money in cyberspace, opens up a new frontier that
is very under-explored. And so I think that's important to keep in mind when
kind of discussing what sovereign engineering is and what it should be because
there's a certain group of people that is interested in exploring the seas. It's
not just anyone. It's explorers and adventures and people willing to take a risk
and pirates and so on. And those are the people that we want to attract and
that's why we chose this kind of imagery and this kind of logo and all those
kind of things because we are not interested in kind of, we're not interested in
the conventional way of doing things, we're not interested in people that are in
love with the conventional with them and the conventional ways of doing things.
And if you want to have something nice and safe and you want to stay on shore in
safety, the sovereign engineering is probably not for you. You shouldn't come
actually. So we're looking for the wild ones, for the explorers, for the
adventurers and for those people that agree with us that Bitcoin and Nasr and
Freedom Technology in general opens up a new frontier that is very much under
explored. So I wanted to mention that as well so that it all kind of hangs
together both from the name and the imagery and the vibe and the style of the
whole thing. All right, that's it.



