Slogan: "Ship the future"

Quote: "If you want to build a ship, don't drum up the men to gather wood, divide the work, and give orders. Instead, teach them to yearn for the vast and endless sea." —Antoine de Saint-Exupéry

Summary: Six weeks of high-bandwidth ideation, experimentation, mentorship, dialogue, cross-pollination and discussions on how to build kickass applications, services, and businesses for a self-sovereign future. 

Elevator pitch: “Provide an environment that fosters deep conversations & collaboration so that we may solve hard problems for future generations.”

“Re-invent the future." (Bell Labs)

“Fix the money, fix the world.”
...but the world is a big place, so:
“Fix the money, fix the internet.”

IMPORTANT: “Solvitur ambulando.” —Saint Augustine (the defender of Truth)
"By walking it shall be solved." 

"Left foot right foot, left brain right brain."

"The computer can be used as a tool to liberate and protect people, rather than to control them." --Hal Finney
(Full quote: "It seemed so obvious to me: "Here we are faced with the problems of loss of privacy, creeping computerization, massive databases, more centralization - and [David] Chaum offers a completely different direction to go in, one which puts power into the hands of individuals rather an governments and corporations. The computer can be used as a tool to liberate and protect people, rather than to control them."")

"Cypherpunks write Code." --Eric Hughes

"What does it mean to 'build it right?'" --Pablo & Gigi 

Questions to ask:
- "Are you providing value or are you capturing your users?"
- "Who can rug-pull you?"
- "Who can rug-pull your users?"
- "Can YOU rug-pull your users?"
- "What's the exit cost for your users?"
- "What's the exit cost for you?"

"Freedom Tech is rug-pull resistent technology." --Gigi

"Direction is so much more important than speed. Many are going nowhere fast."

"If you want to go fast, go alone. If you want to go far, go together."

"A beautiful thing is never perfect."

ENDURANCE

"Fortitudine vincimus" ("By endurance we conquer") -- Ernest Shackleton
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Endurance_(1912_ship)


NO SOLUTIONS

"No solutions, only trade-offs."
(That's also where the "No Solutions" Podcast came from. Link: https://castr.me/npub1n00yy9y3704drtpph5wszen64w287nquftkcwcjv7gnnkpk2q54s73000n )


"Happiness is shipping." --DHH
https://world.hey.com/dhh/that-shipping-feeling-b7c8c565